<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<title>Wanderer documentation</title>

<xmp theme="united" style="display:none;">


## WANDERER DOCUMENTATION ####################################################################################

1. AIM
2. ACCESS AND CITATION
3. USING WANDERER
4. DESCRIPTION OF THE DOWNLODABLE FILES GENERATED BY WANDERER
 - DNA METHYLATION FILES
 - GENE EXPRESSION FILES
5. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
6. REFERENCES
7. VERSIONS AND COPYRIGHT
8. CONTACT


### 1. AIM ###################################################################################################

**Wanderer** is a very simple and intuitive web tool allowing real time access and visualization of gene expression and DNA methylation profiles obtained from the **TCGA Research Network** (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) using gene targeted queries. Wanderer is addressed to a broad variety of experimentalists and clinicians without deep bioinformatics skills.


### 2. ACCESS AND CITATION ####################################################################################

Wanderer may be accessed at www.maplab.cat/wanderer

If you find this software useful please consider citing our paper:  (in preparation).


### 3. USING WANDERER  ########################################################################################

3.1. **Enter** a gene name (BRCA1 is used as default) or the equivalent Ensembl gene ID and press the _Refresh_ button to update the output. Modifying the rest of options will automatically update the graphs. 

3.2. Choose a **Dataset** (default dataset is Breast Invasive Carcinoma (BRCA)) and the **Data type** (450k Methylation array or Illumina HiSeq RNAseq) in the respective drop down menus.

3.3. Use the **Zoom** sliding bar to adjust the displayed chromosomal region or tick the **Specify a region** box for a more precise selection. Only values in the range defined by the zoom slider will be accepted.

3.4. Customize the graphical display of the data using **Plotting parameters**. Graphs are automatically updated after any change.

3.5. **Download** graphs and tables containing the selected data or share the output by generating a permanent link.



### 4. DESCRIPTION OF THE DOWNLODABLE FILES GENERATED BY WANDERER ############################################

Wanderer generates several images and data files that may be downloaded as a compressed file. The files are named using the following nomenclature: 

`Wanderer_[Database name]_[data type]_[date and time of the query].`



#### 4.1 DNA METHYLATION FILES ###############################################################################

The predefined query for DNA methylation produces the following graphs and data files:

4.1.1. Profile plots displaying the beta values for each probe in two separate panels representing subset of normal (upper panel, blue marks) and tumor samples (bottom panel, red marks) of the selected dataset. Lines link different probes corresponding to the same sample. The gene location and direction is depicted with an arrow. CpG island located probes are colored in green. 

_File name examples_:

_Vectorial format:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_methylation_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.pdf`

_Raster version:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_methylation_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.png`

4.1.2. Profile plots displaying the average methylation for all the normal (blue) and tumor samples (red) of the selected dataset. The gene location and strand is depicted with an arrow. CpG island located probes are colored in green. The CpGs showing statistical differences between normal and tumor are highlighted with an asterisk (Wilcoxon adjusted p-value < 0.05).

_File name examples:_

_Vectorial format:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_Mean_methylation_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.pdf`

_Raster version:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_Mean_methylation_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.png`

4.1.3. Two tables consisting of a comma separated data matrix containing data for normal and tumor samples respectively. Table contents: First row: Sample ID, First column: 450K Methylation array probe name, second column: DNA methylation beta value.

_File name examples:_

`Wanderer_BRCA1_methylation_brca_Normal_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`

`Wanderer_BRCA1_methylation_brca_Tumor_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`

4.1.4. A comma separated data matrix with the annotation for each of the informative probes and descriptive analysis of the DNA methylation data. The columns correspond to:
  - probe, probe name
  - chr, the chromosome
  - cg_start, the genomic position the CpG starts at
  - cg_end, the genomic position the CpG ends at
  - percentgc, the GC content of the illumina 450k array probe
  - probetype, the type of the illumina 450k array probe 
  - probestart, the genomic position the probe starts at
  - probeend, the genomic position the probe ends at
  - genestart, the genomic position the closest gene to the probe starts at
  - geneend, the genomic position the closest gene to the probe ends at
  - genestrand, the closest gene strand
  - ENSEMBL_geneID, the closest gene id at ensembl
  - genebiotype, the closest gene biotype (protein coding, retained intron...)
  - genename, the closest gene symbol
  - cpgistart, for those CpG are inside a CpG island, the coordinate this islands starts at
  - cpgiend, for those CpG are inside a CpG island, the coordinate this islands ends at
  - cpgiid, for those CpG are inside a CpG island, CpG island identifier
  - Norm_nsamples, number of normal samples for this dataset in this release
  - Norm_mean, mean of the beta values for normals 
  - Norm_sd, standard deviation of the beta values for normals
  - Tum_nsamples, number of tumor samples for this dataset in this release
  - Tum_mean, mean of the beta values for tumors
  - Tum_sd, standard deviation of the beta values for tumors
  - wilcox_stat, Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test W parameter (nonparametric comparison of normals vs tumors)
  - pval, Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test p value (nonparametric comparison of normals vs tumors, low values indicates that differences are detected)
  - adj.pval, Benjamini and Hochberg adjustement (False Discovery Rate) for multiple testing.

__File name examples:__
`Wanderer_BRCA1_methylation_brca_annotations_and_statistical_analysis_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`


#### 4.2 GENE EXPRESSION FILES ###############################################################################

4.2.1. Profile plots displaying the log2-transformed RPKM values [(Guo, 2013)] for each exon in two separate panels for a subset of normal (upper panel, blue marks) and tumor samples (bottom panel, red marks) from the selected dataset. Lines link values corresponding to the same sample. The gene location and strand is depicted with an arrow.

_File name examples:_

_Vectorial format:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.pdf`

_Raster version:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.png`

4.2.2. Profile plots of the average expression for all the normal (blue) and tumor samples (red) of the selected dataset. The gene location and strand is depicted with an arrow. The exons showing statistically significant differences between normal and tumor are highlighted with an asterisk (Wilcoxon adjusted p-value < 0.05).

_File name examples:_

_Vectorial format:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_Mean_expression_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.pdf`

_Raster version:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_Mean_expression_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.png`

4.2.3. Boxplot and a stripchart graphs showing the expression values summarized by gene for all the normal (blue) and tumor samples (red) of the selected dataset. The expression values are log2-transformed normalized RSEM values [(Guo, 2013)] and reflect the expression of the gene as a whole.

_File name examples:_

_Vectorial format:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_boxplot_expression_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.pdf`

_Raster version:_ `Wanderer_BRCA1_boxplot_expression_brca_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.png`

4.2.4. Two tables consisting of a comma separated data matrix with the exon location (first column) and a column with the log2-transformed RPKM values for each of the exons of all the samples in the dataset. Sample names are in the first row (header). 

_File name examples:_

`Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_Normal_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`

`Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_Tumor_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`

4.2.5. A comma separated data matrix with the available normal and tumors sample names (first column) and a column with the log2-transformed RSEM values for your gene of interest.

_File name examples:_ 

`Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_Normal_RNAseqGENE_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`

`Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_Tumor_RNAseqGENE_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`

4.2.6. A comma separated data matrix with the annotation of your gene expression data, as well some descriptive analysis. The columns correspond to:

  - exon, exon identifier according to the TCGA pipeline
  - id, exon identifier according to Genome Browser exons track
  - ENSEMBL_geneID, the gene identifier according to ENSEMBL (ENSG identifier)
  - ENSEMBL_transcriptID, the transcript identifier according to ENSEMBL (ENST identifier)
  - chr, the chromosome the exon is located at
  - exon_start, the genomic coordinate the exon starts at 
  - exon_end, the genomic coordinate the exon ends at
  - strand, the genomic strand of the exon's gene.
  - genestart, the genomic start position of the exon's gene.
  - geneend, the genomic end position of the exon's gene.
  - genebiotype, exon's gene biotype (protein coding, retained intron...)
  - genename, exon's gene symbol
  - rnaseqgeneid, the TCGA exon's gene identifier
  - Norm_nsamples, number of normal samples for this dataset in this release
  - Norm_mean, mean of log2-transformed RPKM for normals 
  - Norm_sd, standard deviation of log2-transformed RPKM in normals
  - Tum_nsamples, number of tumor samples for this dataset in this release
  - Tum_mean, mean of log2-transformed RPKM for tumors
  - Tum_sd, standard deviation of log2-transformed RPKM in tumors
  - wilcox_stat, Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test W parameter (nonparametric comparison of normals vs tumors)
  - pval, Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test p value (nonparametric comparison of normals vs tumors, low values indicates that differences are detected)
  - adj.pval, Benjamini and Hochberg adjustement (False Discovery Rate) for multiple testing.


_File name example:_
`Wanderer_BRCA1_expression_brca_annotations_and_statistical_analysis_Apr_29_2015_at_170440_CEST.csv`


### 5. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS  ###########################################################################


5.1. **Wanderer says there are not enough samples to perform statistical analysis, what does it mean?**

Not enough number of informative samples to compute the Wilcoxon test. We note that, although we calculate the test with small number of samples, this result might be meaningless without a minimum number of cases.

5.2. **The CSV files are a single line file!**

We use Linux/UNIX linefeeds. Although your text viewer (i.e. notepad) might merge all the lines under Windows, your spreadsheet software (i.e. Excel) will recognize the line separation properly.

5.3. **How can I open a CSV in my spreadsheet software?**

In most cases it should work by just using the **open with** (right click with the mouse on the file icon). Alternatively, launch the application and import data from text, comma-separated or character-delimited values (this depends on the software).

5.4. **How and when did you download the data from the TCGA?**

Data from TCGA was downloaded using the TCGA-Assembler with the Traverse Result File 'DirectoryTraverseResult_Jul-08-2014.rda' 

5.5. **What is the origin of annotation data?**

450k methylation array probes have been annotated as described in [(Price, 2013)].

For RNAseq data we used BioMart and Ensembl gene annotations and the exon positions provided by TCGA and UCSC Genome Browser. Data were merged using the function overlapRegions from the regioneR Bioconductor package.

5.6. **What does RPKM and RSEM stand for?**

Both values are directly obtained from the TCGA pipeline for RNA seq v2 expression analysis. RPKM stands for *reads per kilobase per million mapped reads* [(Guo, 2013)][(Guo, 2013)] and is used to represent exon expression levels. RSEM stands for *RNA-Seq by Expectation-Maximization* [(Guo, 2013)][(Guo, 2013)] and is used to represent gene expression levels. We log2-transform these values adding one to get rid of zeroes; that means we plot log_2(x+1) RPKM or RSEM values.


### 6. REFERENCES ############################################################################################

[(Guo, 2013)]: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0071462 (Large Scale Comparison of Gene Expression Levels by Microarrays and RNAseq Using TCGA Data)
[(Guo, 2013)] Guo, Yan, et al. **Large scale comparison of gene expression levels by microarrays and RNAseq using TCGA data.** PloS one 8.8 (2013): e71462.


[(Price, 2013)]: http://www.epigeneticsandchromatin.com/content/6/1/4 (Additional annotation enhances potential for biologically-relevant analysis of the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array)
[(Price, 2013)] Price et al. **Additional annotation enhances potential for biologically-relevant analysis of the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array**. Epigenetics & Chromatin 2013, 6:4 doi:10.1186/1756-8935-6-4.


[(Zhu, 2014)]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24874569 (TCGA-assembler: open-source software for retrieving and processing TCGA data.)
[(Zhu, 2014)] Y. Zhu, P. Qiu, Y. Ji. **TCGA-Assembler: Open-Source Software for Retrieving and Processing TCGA Data**. Nature Methods. 11:599-600, 2014. | doi:10.1038/nmeth.2956).



#### 7. NEWS #################################################################################################

This documentation corresponds to Wanderer v1.0. The full development log can be found at https://sourceforge.net/projects/tcga-wanderer/. The previous major releases of **Wanderer** are:

- Mon Dec 29 15:14:48 2014 **Alpha Release** 21f1c7d9c742011e289842752a1ea871c13dc5fb
- Mon Oct  6 15:04:45 2014 **Project start** 3e5440a552d04319331415e74635e144045cc6ae

This document corresponds to

`commit ddc7c2ee86eade104855a71f90224d7af23c625d
Author: Izaskun Mallona <imallona@imppc.org>
Date:   Tue May 12 09:44:57 2015 +0200
`

#### 8. COPYRIGHT ############################################################################################

Some datasets have limitations for usage until a global analysis is published; please contact TCGA before publishing. Copyright IMPPC, 2014 - Izaskun Mallona, Anna Díez-Villanueva and Miguel A. Peinado. Logo by Julien Douet.


#### 9. CONTACT ##############################################################################################

Izaskun Mallona (imallona@imppc.org)
Anna Diez-Villanueva (adiez@imppc.org)
Miguel A. Peinado (map@imppc.org)

www.maplab.cat

</xmp>

<script src="http://strapdownjs.com/v/0.2/strapdown.js"></script>
</html>